---
layout: post
title:  "Work - Memo 2"
date:   2017-11-12 17:50:00
categories: ['Memos','Work QE']
published: true
Abstract:
defs_used:


---

The third and fourth weeks of reading focus on the organization of work and its relationship to worker's collective resistance with respect to employers. The question of the organization of work is twofold, as Smith (1997) makes clear in the review of flexible work. Smith argues that there are opposing viewpoints of flexible work, because flexibility is really understood in two distinct ways: functional flexibility and numerical flexibility. For Smith, functional flexibility is seen as somewhat beneficial to the worker. These processes often are meant to involve workers more in the process or production, to take their input into account. This allows for more meaningful work, and therefore workers are less likely to be alienated from their work. However, functional flexibility may also result in more work for certain workers, or higher expectation for production overall. In addition, when work is flexibly organized, individual control is meant to force workers to exert control over each other, making them de-facto managers without an increase in pay.

Braverman (1979) also deals with work flexibility in this way, but is less optimistic than Smith. For Braverman, even if workplace flexibility is correlated with higher subjective ratings of a job, the increased flexibility is really a symptom of a worsening workplace. This is because individuals with flexibility are really simply provided the illusion of making decisions, when in reality the flexibility is small and meaningless. The meaninglessness of work comes in part due to a scientific management style approach developed by Taylor (1911) in which each aspect of the job has been subdivided into its smallest component parts. Even when an individual is allowed to move from one to another component job, the work itself is devoid of spontaneity, of working flexibly to realize an individual purpose, the thing that makes us human. Instead, the flexibility is simply a tool to increase production.

Smith argues that a flexible workforce is also one in which employers can hire and fire their employees based on momentary need. This is a break from the previous era where workers could expect to remain hired regardless of say, seasonal demand. The duality of the organization of work within the firm and the organization of work within the economy more thoroughly are both represented in this weeks readings to some extent. Kalleberg (2003) studies the different types of nonstandard work relations to make more sense of the increasingly segmented and differentiated workforce.

But at the same time that the two aspects of flexibility are differentiated, both Kalleberg and Smith find it difficult to cleanly separate them. Smith points out that while some workers employment is relatively precarious, other workers in the same workforce are supposed to work longer hours to make up for the loss of more flexible workers. Kalleberg also points out that the different types of labor markets also reflect different organizations of work, and individuals have different sets of problems, and sometimes advantages, depending on which labor segment of the labor market they are participating in. For instance, independent contractors are generally in charge of organizing their own work and are quite happy, and even though they have nonstandard work agreements, they are different people and have different problems than those who work for Temp Agencies, where there is a triangular set of social relations between the agency, the hiring company, and the individual worker. Each segment of the labor market organizes work differently both in the labor market and general trends within the organization.

Though there is differentiation within flexible work, the overall trend of increased flexibility could be interpreted as the newest phase in the organization of work practices. As Edwards (1978) shows, the ways in which employers deal with workers must address worker's direction, evaluation, and discipline. While Edwards' study shows how technical and bureaucratic control come together to form a new system of control in the mid twentieth century, it is perhaps the case that numerical and functional flexibility are the new two regimes which deal with this same issue. Flexibility in tasks, along with descriptions of what is to be done, deal with a workers direction. One may think of the non-standard labor market as a form of discipline, in which if you are not an outstanding worker you will simply be moved to part-time, or will not get the hours that you want. Smith also argues that workers given more flexibility, at some levels, are forced to discipline and manage themselves, the price of the prize of self-direction.

How can workers resist these new forms of control? The most discussed response in the literature is unionization. However, it is unclear what spurs workers to unionize. Fantasia (1988) points out that in a workplace where researchers agreed there was no chance of unionization, the workers unionized only a short time after the research concluded. Fantasia interviews workers to make sense of the process of unionization, and how the process require workers to develop a cultural solidarity. In the fight to unionize, workers develop bonds with each other, figure out new practices to take care of each other and the movement, and they do so in spontaneous ways that are difficult to easily make sense of. Isaac and Griffin (2003) also argue that empirical analysis of trends with respect to unionization is difficult to accomplish successfully. In order to do so one must take into account specifics of the historical era.

While the research seems to be on the fence about what drives unionization, Bernhardt et. al (2003) describe an avenue which determines aspects of work organization beyond the labor-capital confrontation within a single workplace. That is, if some organizations have a unionized workforce, then other organizations within the same geographical region will provide workers with better conditions in order to prevent unionization. This shows that control can be determined at a macro level in addition to a micro level, a factor that much of the research leaves out.
