---
layout: post
title:  "Matt Rowe - Crafting the Institutional Self"
date:   2017-11-27 17:50:00
categories: ['Rowe','JMPT']
published: true
Abstract:
defs_used:


---

Artistic Labor

People work across sectors, create job portfolios, and have little regret or concern about selling out

What are teh logics people use to understand what they're doing? IF you're not interested inp ure aesthetics, what's goign on?
Creative work in commercial settings create a set of detached concern.

In the art world people SPAN BOUNDARIES

What is a boundary spanning career? People move into or out of fields, and the meanin gof work also changes.

We need a micro level conceptual model that makes sense of how people orient themselves to shifting institutional fields?

How do people make sense of this stuff:
People change jobs to find a better fit. It is context dependent and improvisationsal.

If you move jobs, you can do so to accomplish FIT. People do some kind of self-accounting and self-presentation.

Start with current students and graduates in two departments.

Some peopel have a low commitment to their skillsets, and they can move opportunistically.

Different professions require slighlty different skills, and moving between them is difficult.

There is also a strategic positioning, where you show yourself in certain way


People also work in particular styles

## Style

People have a hard time making things and then taking criticism.

People work on their affect and their reputation,

When assessing i, people do certain things.



How many people crossed boundaries and how many boundary crossings were there? Did you find any differences between those who crossed and did not cross boundaries in terms of their skills and their styles?

Were different TYPES of moves making people think about things differently?

Is the model that the 
