
Bourdieu makes two basic arguments about the cognitive aspects of social life, which are essential to understanding his theory. First, individuals become habituated to certain practices over time, such that they do them unthinkingly.  Second, people develop certain ways of making sense of the world (Bourdieu calls them dispositions, Sewell would call them schemas), and they transpose the dispositions developed in one area into another area.

Bourdieu then socializes the cognitive, putting the cognitive argument into a greater social structure. These habituated practices are class based. They are class based partially because people are sharing the same experiences, going to the same schools, parties, etc., and these experiences provide the bases for our habituated practices and dispositions. Bourdieu argues that "the same history objectified in habitus and structures" generates practices which are "mutually intelligible and immediately adjusted to the structures." (Logic of Practice, 58) Shared meaning is based on shared practices, and to the extent that individuals are separated from one another, the ways they make sense of and act on the world are different.

But Bourdieu is also concerned in uncovering how there is hidden social meaning tied to social cleavages. That is, how seemingly meaningful and, perhaps more importantly, purposeful distinctions, become decisions which become embodied, something that one is rather than something that one thinks. (Logic of Practice, 71)

However, it is in the purposeful section of the argument where Bourdieu's argument is weakest. For instance, Bourdieu argues that in the upper classes we learn of different ways of eating appropriately: "a man should eat with his whole mouth, wholeheartedly, and
not, like women, just with the lips, that is, halfheartedly, with reservation
and restraint, but also with dissimulation." (Logic of Practice, 70) In Distinction, the necessary connection between a practice and social divisions is drawn continuously. Bourdieu is distinctly concerned with the ways in which a painting of tree bark, favored by more high than low class individuals in his sample, is based off meaningful aspects of education. Bourdieu argues that more highly educated individuals think a photo of a landscape would be "trivial," and prefer instead beautiful photographs of "objects socially designated as meaningless-a metal frame, the bark of a tree, and especially cabbages" (Distinction, p.35)

The problem with the use of this type of data in order to make an argument about class based practices, is that, with enough time, one can come up with an argument for why anything should be done by one group or another, one class or another. Foucault critiques the descending form of analysis, in which we start with a class structure and from there make arguments about the outcome. Foucault argues that this descending type of analysis is too easy: "I believe that anything can be deduced from the general phenomenon of the domination of the bourgeois class. What needs to be done is something quite different. One needs to investigate historically, and beginning from the lowest level, how mechanisms of power have been able to function." (Power/Knowledge, 100)

The interesting thing with Bourdieu is that he seems to come at the question of embodied practices simultaneously from a descending and an ascending way, but in the end Bourdieu relies quite heavily on arguments built on class-based logics to describe differences. That is, there is seems to be a focus and a respect for the practices themselves in a fundamental way, but in the end, each practice seems to have a formal and meaningful origin which can be uncovered.

From a Foucauldian perspective, the only way to prove that there is truly a class-based difference in practices which reproduce social structures is to further investigate the practices and dispositions as such. This would require returning to Bourdieu's basic arguments regarding the habitus: individuals become habituated to certain practices over time which become unthinking, and individuals develop dispositions with regard to practice that can be transposed from one practice to another. Once we understand more fully how practices become incorporated, then we can determine the validity of an argument in which class plays the main role in creating these differences.

The claims which I believe are in greatest need of attention are: (a) When do practices become habituated? (b) Once a practices become habituated, how often do they change, (c) If practices do change, why do they do so? (d) To what degree of regularity does some disposition (some cognitive frame) accompany a practice? (e) How many dispositions do individuals hold? (e) What predicts which disposition, if any, will be applied in a new situation?

Bourdieu's argument regarding class-based similarity rests on the notion that practices become habituated early on, are stable, are based on a few dispositions (thought processes which in their most embodied become tastes) and the dispositions are applied to new situations in a standard way with respect to a class. However, it could be just as possible that new practices and dispositions are continuously becoming habituated based on social networks and the media. It could be the case that individuals unthinkingly develop a way of doing something, and care little about the way it is done. It could be that a way of doing things is simply copied, without any regard to a disposition or a class-based phenomenon.

Let us take an action in a specific field, say physicians choosing whether or not to accept medicaid, as an example to put them in conversation. Medicaid patients provide an ethical dilemma for physicians, since physicians are paid considerably less for seeing Medicaid patients, but these patients arguably present with a greater need for care, and physicians often take medical oaths and declarations which ask to help the sick according to ability. For Bourdieu, the relation to the specific practice is determined by early education and upbringing. Tastes for medicaid provision, then, may relate to what one learned about the importance of money, empathy, and the poor in early education. The decision a physician makes is, therefore, constituted by his class position in the final instance.

The problem is, the content of this decision is up in the air. Does one distinguish oneself morally by accepting medicaid, or by not accepting medicaid? Does one look down on those who put profit first, or those who do not? Is accepting medicaid patients a way to show that one has enough money not to worry about the profits, or does distinction mean eliminating all contact with the lower classes. Any action can be explained within Bourdieu's framework in order to come back to an argument related to class based dispositions. However, before making these higher level claims, one should understand the dynamics of medicaid provision. Is it correlated with other practices? How frequently do physicians change their decisions with respect to provision? Is provision related to different backgrounds in medicine, or from attending different medical schools or in different regions. Do these practices develop and change based on the different contemporary influences within a hospital, from coworkers or superiors? These are the types of basic questions which when answered play a part in developing a deeper understanding of how practices and dispositions operate. Once the practices and dispositions are understood more fully as such, then it makes sense to try and develop a more complex argument which takes into account these higher class-based arguments. This is not to say that class does not play a definitive role in physicians decisions to accept Medicaid. Indeed, I am sympathetic to Bourdieu's argument. However, an ascending analysis which first concerns itself with the dynamics of the social influence, internalization, and transposal of dispositions and practices at a basic level would make Bourdieu's argument more compelling.
