---
layout: post
title:  "Lizardo and Skyles - Reconceptualizing and Theorizing Omnivorousness"
date:   2018-2-27 17:50:00
categories: ['Lizardo','Skyles','Culture QE','Reading Notes']
published: true
Abstract: "Scores of sociological studies have provided evidence for the association between broad cultural taste, or omnivorousness, and various status characteristics, such as education, occupation, and age. Nevertheless, the literature lacks a consistent theoretical foundation with which to understand and organize these empirical findings. In this article, we offer such a framework, suggesting that a mechanism-based approach is helpful for examination of the origins of the omnivore-univore taste pattern as well as its class-based distribution. We reground the discussion of this phenomenon in Distinction (Bourdieu 1984), conceptualizing omnivorous taste as a transposable form of the aesthetic disposition available most readily to individuals who convert early aesthetic training into high cultural capital occupational trajectories. After outlining the genetic mechanisms that link the aesthetic disposition to early socialization trajectories, we identify two relational mechanisms that modulate its manifestation (either enhancing or inhibiting it) after early socialization."
defs_used:


---
Abstract
>Scores of sociological studies have provided evidence for the association between broad cultural taste, or omnivorousness, and various status characteristics, such as education, occupation, and age. Nevertheless, the literature lacks a consistent theoretical foundation with which to understand and organize these empirical findings. In this article, we offer such a framework, suggesting that a mechanism-based approach is helpful for examination of the origins of the omnivore-univore taste pattern as well as its class-based distribution. We reground the discussion of this phenomenon in Distinction (Bourdieu 1984), conceptualizing omnivorous taste as a transposable form of the aesthetic disposition available most readily to individuals who convert early aesthetic training into high cultural capital occupational trajectories. After outlining the genetic mechanisms that link the aesthetic disposition to early socialization trajectories, we identify two relational mechanisms that modulate its manifestation (either enhancing or inhibiting it) after early socialization.

This paper argues that social position, rather than network structure (though the two are undoubtedly correlated in some way). We now think that tastes are an inverted pyramid, the higher up you are, the more stuff you like.

# Theorizing Omnivorousness with Mechanisms

So we theorize a specific mechanism that produces the omnivore-univore taste pattern.

# Respecifying Omnivorousness
## Disposition

1. Omnivorousness is a disposition. The bases are habitual and tied to routine practice.

2. Omnivorousness is also rooted in a set of abilities generated by a specific enculturation history. That is, this is an ability to appreciate different things.  
So,
3. Omnivorousness is based primarily on the (early) acquisition of of scheams of perception and appreciation.

4. As a practical scheme, it can be transposed across domains and across genres and subgenres.

5. Omnivorousness is a skill subject to predictable dynamics of accumulation and the development of expertise.

## A variation of the Aesthetic Disposition

The argument usually is that the omnivore thesis invalidates Bourdieu's slob thesis.

However, this is really an argument about aesthetic appreciation.

>Bourdieu (1984) sociologizes the traditional (Kantian) account by drawing three interrelated
inferences from his dispositional action theory

Bourdieus' theory argues that
1. If autonomy of easthetic experience exists, then the disposition must be embodied in people, thus having a specific history.
>This last claim implies that the aesthetic disposition can be generated
only within those status situations in which the quality of everyday experience afforded
by the relevant material conditions (the privileged ability to avoid concern with the practical
and the functional) matches what is implied by the philosophical characterization.
By
implication, members of groups whose status situations thrust on them a nonnegotiable
concern with the practical necessities of everyday life will be relatively less likely to
develop the capacity to separate the purely formal from the purely functional. Both of these
claims jointly imply the existence of structured heterogeneity in the extent to which the
aesthetic disposition manifests itself across individuals (Atkinson 2011; Holt 1998; Warde
et al. 2008). This is in fact the core (empirical) argument of Distinction (Bourdieu 1984).

Thhe aesthetic disposition is based on two capacities.
1. To consider in and for themselves as form and function, legitimate works of art and those which are not yet consecrated.
2. The capacity to constitute easthetically bojects that are ordinary or common.

>Our basic argument is that omnivorousness emerges as an empirical manifestation of the
operation of the aesthetic disposition under contemporary macro-level conditions. The disposition
is analytically and empirically separable from the conditions under which it is
deployed (although it is not quite separable from the conditions under which it is most likely
to be developed). Empirical manifestations of the disposition may be altered when conditions
change, even if the underlying nature of the disposition (e.g., the package of abilities
and skills that define it) remains relatively unchanged across historical periods p. 269

People will also want to consecrate those things which they consume in high volume as easthetic in some way.

## Transposable

One can transpose the scheme onto new objects, it is not fixed.

The idea here, I think, is that the underlying mechanism of omnivorousness is the same as snobbisheness before. Now we are just applying the same thing (the aesthetic disposition) to something new.

>When culturally privileged persons appropriate cultural goods not traditionally
designated as having aesthetic value, they do so by assimilating the content of the work into
the already mastered “schema” of art, thus consuming the “same” good under a different
“mode” (Holt 1998; Tampubolon 2008a:413). p.269

>This explains why we seldom observe arts consumption
limiting itself to any one particular genre or style, especially among members of some
occupational groups, such as primary and secondary education teachers and other cultural
and symbolic producers. Instead, we observe patterns of engagement in the arts that range
across the entire spectrum of offerings; one form of consumption (e.g., visual arts) tends to
be highly correlated with other forms (live musical performances) (Bourdieu 1984; DiMaggio
and Useem 1978:188). This also explains why omnivorousness tends to be highly correlated
with the same sociodemographic markers (e.g., high occupational status and higher
levels of educational attainment) and markers of privilege in the family environment (e.g.,
parental education, early training in the arts, having played a musical instrument in childhood)
as is the traditional disposition toward fine arts p.270

It is important to note that those with an aesthetic disposition, while displaying some aspects of omnivorousness, tend to favor high culture.

>Rather than liking everything, omnivores—especially those endowed with
objectified and institutionalized markers of cultural capital, such as educational qualifications—
tend to be disproportionately attracted to traditionally consecrated forms of culture
and the arts. This pattern has been most strongly confirmed in a recent mixed-methods
study of cultural taste in the United Kingdom (Warde et al. 2008:158). The basic finding
here is that “alongside a relative openness to popular culture evidenced by their volume of
likes, omnivores disproportionately favoured legitimate items.” p. 270

Indeed, omnivores don't even like the same things as the masses, even though they show fewer dislikes.

## Cumulative Advantage
>So far, we have characterized omnivorousness as a transposable variant of the aesthetic
disposition whose capacity to be transposed into increasingly less canonical experiences
and objects increases with practice p. 271

>Empirically, this implies that the more
self-assured a person is in his or her command of the aesthetic disposition, the more likely
it is that he or she will attempt to extend it to noncanonical aesthetic objects (Bourdieu
1984:63). p.271

>If a process of scheme transfer is indeed at work, and this transfer tends to
be directed or asymmetric, originating in traditionally aesthetic realms toward cultural
domains less subject to traditional aestheticism, then we should find that the class of omnivores
increasingly comes to be populated by persons with early exposure to the fine arts
scheme. These individuals become more likely to include less artistically legitimate (popular)
culture into their repertoire than are persons with very little early exposure to the fine
arts who later come to adopt them. Peterson and Rossman (2008:313) provide evidence
consistent with this prediction: “The change [toward omnivorousness] is the result more of
high-status people embracing the popular arts than of working-class people embracing what
were called the fine arts.” p.271

Early exposure to a culturally priviliged environment may increase one's aesthetic disposition.

# Variations - Two Relational Mechanisms

## HOrizonta Boundary Drawing

>We suggest that omnivorousness is instead primarily activated via a horizontal boundarydrawing
mechanism (Bourdieu 1984:176, 258; Lamont 1992), distinct from the traditional
notion of vertical boundary drawing. Here the iterative deployment of the disposition differentiates
those occupational groups whose relative asset structure is tilted toward cultural
capital from those closer to the economic capital pole (Bourdieu 1984:265; Lamont 1992).
This horizontal boundary-drawing mechanism links naturally to the sociogenetic mechanisms
alluded to above. In particular, members of cultural-capital-heavy groups are more likely to
have acquired the aesthetic disposition early in life and are also more likely (1) to extend the
aesthetic disposition to nonconventional objects and (2) to have acquired an assured command
of the formalist aestheticism that makes this possible in the first place p. 274

That is, people fo the same class discussing each others cultures. That is, high class artists discussing culture.

>The aesthetic scheme toward nonstandard art objects (this is, we have argued, the basis
of the omnivore phenomenon) may involve “liking the same things differently, [or] liking
different things, less obviously marked out for admiration” (Bourdieu 1984:282, emphasis
added) since appropriation (indirect or embodied) premised on access but not ownership
necessarily highlights the how of aesthetic consumption over the exogenously determined
qualities of the appropriated object p. 275

## Intergeneration Differentiation

Here you try and distinguish yourself from your parents in the same class.

>Here we suggest that omnivorousness may also be the result of synchronic
partitions in the class structure premised on age (Tampubolon 2010). This separates
“newcomers” from “incumbents” or “senior members” in a given class stratum, generating
predictable field-theoretic positional struggles (Bourdieu 1984:295). These conflict
dynamics have an equally predictable homologue in the field of cultural production separating
“new” from “established” styles p. 276


>This may lead to a cross-generational aestheticized extension contest—and a
related process of aesthetic inflation—with each new cohort of incumbents being induced
to apply the aesthetic disposition to a set of cultural goods that is increasingly distinct from
those chosen by the more senior members of the class. This dynamic is less likely to be
useful as an explanation of the origins of the search for cultural breadth definitional of the
omnivore phenomenon. However, a cross-generational distinction mechanism may be useful
in bringing conceptual order to recent discussions of the social distribution of types of
omnivorousness, as well as providing a process-based account of the consumption-side
bases of the genre-mobility phenomenon. p.276
