---
layout: post
title:  "Emirbayer and Johnson - Bourdieu and Organizational Analysis"
date:   2018-2-14 17:50:00
categories: ['Emirbayer','Bourdieu','Theory QE','Reading Notes']
published: true
Abstract: "Despite some promising steps in the right direction, organizational analysis has yet to exploit fully the theoretical and empirical possibilities inherent in the writings of Pierre Bourdieu. While certain concepts associated with his thought, such as field and capital, are already widely known in the organizational literature, the specific ways in which these terms are being used provide ample evidence that the full significance of his relational mode of thought has yet to be sufficiently apprehended. Moreover, the almost complete inattention to habitus, the third of Bourdieu's major concepts, without which the concepts of field and capital (at least as he deployed them) make no sense, further attests to the misappropriation of his ideas and to the lack of appreciation of their potential usefulness. It is our aim in this paper, by contrast, to set forth a more informed and comprehensive account of what a relational - and, in particular, a Bourdieu-inspired - agenda for organizational research might look like. Accordingly, we examine the implications of his theoretical framework for interorganizational relations, as well as for organizations themselves analyzed as fields. The primary advantage of such an approach, we argue, is the central place accorded therein to the social conditions under which inter- and intraorganizational power relations are produced, reproduced, and contested."
defs_used:


---
Abstract:
>Despite some promising steps in the right direction, organizational analysis has yet to exploit fully the theoretical and empirical possibilities inherent in the writings of Pierre Bourdieu. While certain concepts associated with his thought, such as field and capital, are already widely known in the organizational literature, the specific ways in which these terms are being used provide ample evidence that the full significance of his relational mode of thought has yet to be sufficiently apprehended. Moreover, the almost complete inattention to habitus, the third of Bourdieu 's major concepts, without which the concepts of field and capital (at least as he deployed them) make no sense, further attests to the misappropriation of his ideas and to the lack of appreciation of their potential usefulness. It is our aim in this paper, by contrast, to set forth a more informed and comprehensive account of what a relational - and, in particular, a Bourdieu-inspired - agenda for organizational research might look like. Accordingly, we examine the implications of his theoretical framework for interorganizational relations, as well as for organizations themselves analyzed as fields. The primary advantage of such an approach, we argue, is the central place accorded therein to the social conditions under which inter- and intraorganizational power relations are produced, reproduced, and contested.

HOw can organization studies benefit from Bourdieu?

Fields is a big part of it. We think of fields in an interogranizational sense, the field of power between organizations.

We can look at organizations in competition with each other, and their suppliers and make sense of them all together using a field.

However, we also need to look at the field in terms of the analysis o the social configurations in which organizational fields are embedded.

Also, current looks at fields do not think enough about capitals or habitus. More importantly, we have to think of the three as a whole. But also, not enough on habitus.
Wat is habitus?

> The realtively durbale principles of judgement and practice generated by ana ctor's early life experienes and modified (to a greater or lesser degree) later in life. p.5

Habitus is supposed to link macro-structural settings with future action,  and link past fields to present fields.

Habitus, capital, and field need to be used together, and this paper is about showing that.


So in the field, people occupy different power relations and are struggling for domination. It is a contested terrain.

The different weapons you use to contest your terrain are the different capitals in the field. We must continue to think about the structure of the distribution of resources and the interactions among organizations separately.


So we must remember that an organizational field is part of a structure of power, a configuration of power relations. This is really the shortcoming of my own research vis a vis Bourdieu (though the question is, to what extent do power relations play a role in developing a Habitus?)

People make symbolic differences all the time in order to distinguish themselves in a space of possible positions.

We have culture, which is a space of position taking s then, and social structure, which is the space of positions. This helps us understand organizational conditions and constraints for creativity.

## Internal logic of organizational fields

Fields have an internal logic - there is a combination of structure and history here. We know that the logic of the field is not so logical - there is a partcial history to it. Action for everyone is largely practical based on history and structure without much reflection. This is habitus.

But also, organizations are fields.
