---
layout: post
title:  "Theory - Memo 3"
date:   2018-1-30 17:50:00
categories: ['Theory QE','Memos']
published: true
Abstract:
defs_used:


---

Adam Storer
2/6/2018
Memo 3
One of the most difficult questions contemporary sociology has run up against is the extent to which logics are tied to the material world. Swidler (2001), Vaisey (2009), Sewell (1992) and even Bourdieu (1979) all wrestle with the extent to which some ideas or set of ideas correlate with action in the material world.  The readings for this set of the Qualifying Exam shows that the same question is asked in the Marxist tradition, although with somewhat different framing. In my own research, I often also wonder about this question. In this memo, I first put the different perspectives of this weeks reading into a single conversation. I then discuss the issue of tying these different theories to empirical settings in the real world. I finally discuss two potential studies doing so, one imagined and one my own.
This set of readings each ask in their own way, to what extent are an individual's or group's ideas (or whatever form you wish to characterize the inner-workings of the mind) or actions determined by the economic structure of society. These readings range in their positions. Lukacs (1923) is of the position that, whether we realize it or not, every action in the "social" realm is truly an instantiation of the economic structure and commodity fetishism. Marcuse (1964) has a marginally different account in which the economy imbues us with false needs because capitalism works its way into the innermost parts of the mind. These somewhat traditional Marxist views are held in a different view.
 Gramsci (1971) presents a more complex argument, tying political relations more loosely to economic structure. Though there is room for some political contingency and maneuvering in Gramsci's thought, in the last moment there is a direct structuring of all other realms of action based on economic structure. This is clear to some extent in Gramsci's treatment of Bureaucracy, where Gramsci diverges from Weber's analysis from Bureaucratic principles of rationalization as such by arguing that the form which bureaucracy takes is dependent in the last instance on the economic structure. For Gramsci, the determinant economic structure can be waylaid by politics, but the economic structure continues to push on the current social structure.  
Althusser (1962) insists that the relationship between structure and lived experience is an additional step removed. While there are contradictions inherent in capitalism that guide action, the way that the contradiction is dealt with is determined by much more than the economic structure. Habermas (1985) has a similar view, contrasting the systemic aspects of society (though Habermas includes more than simply the economic system here) with the more spontaneous and contingent lifeworld with its possibility for communicative action. Both of these thinkers make an attempt to tie a complex social world into the forces of the structures on which society sits.  Laclau and Mouffe (1985) present an effective critique of many of these thinkers from the vantage point of post-Marxism. The authors deny the primacy of structure in thought at all, and instead return to a semi-idealist system which essentially comes down to a battle by different groups to articulate the unarticulated within a certain discursive framework.
From my own perspective, one of the most frustrating aspects of this entire set of readings is what seems to be the difficulty these authors have in tying the discussion to an empirical reality. Each theory of how the world operates seems as though it could be true while reading it, and each critique seems equally plausible. In other words, it seems equally possible that any action could be the result of how the economy is structured, how political groups define the action, the relationship between those two, or some other reasoning altogether. An individual may see all relations in completely economic, transactional terms, or there may be other determinants. However, the only empirical realities with which we deal are the lack of worldwide communism and unsubstantiated general views of the world. Gramsci, the most empirically minded of these authors, stands in distinction here, thought it is worth noting that those who follow him do not seem overly concerned with his empirical findings. In structuralist and post-Marxist thought, we seem to replace the empirical world for a renewed focus on Hegel.
Strangely, it is these two lines of thought which I find the most compelling, because they allow for the most variation in a world which we do not fully understand. It would make sense, in other words, not to claim that individuals think and act in a way that is unproven. In an unproven world, the theory should be that many different things could potentially determine thought and action. If we are to consider the determinants of overdetermined action, what else needs to be considered, and what can be done empirically to consider these things? For me, the obvious next question is, what predicts which of the determinants will win out in a given situation? How do compelling determinants spread? In order to make sense of the dynamics of an overdetermined atmosphere that is without or only loosely connected to the economic structure, we must systematically study how determinations operate in the empirical world. In effect, this is the only true test of the extent to which the economic structure has an effect on thought and action.  
In my view, this is the potential tie between this line of theory and mainstream sociology, which has attempted to make empirical sense of how people make meaning and what compels them to act. Is there an opportunity here for theory from above and below to meet in order to form a more complete model of human action and sense making? As of yet, it seems as though the answer is no. Swidler (2001) and Vaisey (2009) have both focused more on how individuals justify their actions, rather than attempting to make sense of motivations. In real time, understanding individual’s motivations is extremely difficult, and it seems clear that post-facto descriptions of situations are reinterpreted by the individual. Given this, the possibility of asking individuals what factors influenced them in favor and against a certain action, and to describe their thought process in doing so, would be impossible.
But this does not need to be the death knell of a link between determinants and action. One possibility may be in framing experiments. For instance, if an individual was prompted with a statement about the primacy and importance of economic life, and then asked to choose the ideal number of hours they work in a week, would this not say something about the potential determinancy of the economic field over others? If given additional frames, such as a family frame or a leisure frame, would we see an effect there? If so, what would the relative effect sizes of the different frames be? If one finds in general that people want to work more hours when the discussion is framed economically, and when the discussion is framed in other ways there is no effect on hours worked, or even a smaller effect than the economic effect, does that not say something about the extent to which the economic structure determines our participation within it?  If one repeated the experiment for a number of different types of actions and a number of different frames, if some frames are greater motivators than others, would this not worth be considering within the context of a theory of society? There would certainly still be the question of why some determinants take precedence over others, but it would at least be a step in the direction of greater knowledge.  
The problem with these types of experiments, though, is that they may not actually translate to the real world. That is, statements about what we would do are not necessarily tied to what they actually would do in situations. To an extent, I hope to address this issue in my dissertation by measuring individuals actions rather than discussing their potential or past actions with them. Through the analysis of medical claims, I believe I can identify two potential sources in which economic determinants come into contradiction with other possible forces. One is the practice of upcoding, wherein doctors claim they gave their patients more complicated, and thus more expensive, procedures than they actually did. By engaging in this type of practice, doctors are putting their own economic wellbeing ahead of the legitimacy of the records, at the expense of the insurance company and potentially the patient. The other practice is accepting Medicaid. Since doctors are paid less for Medicaid patients than other patients, doctors have a disincentive to take on these patients. However, not accepting Medicaid makes life more difficult for poor individuals who are seeking medical attention. In both cases, doctors have the choice to put their economic wellbeing ahead of other principles, other determinants of a situation. Using medical claims, instead of asking for unreliable of accounts of why doctors would or would not do such things, I can watch them do these things.
In addition to watching potential determinants play out in real life situations, I can also determine, to some extent, why these things happen. To the extent that individuals from a certain type of training program, residents with a certain type of attending physician, or doctors with the same types of coworkers, are influenced in regular ways, perhaps we can say something about how different determinants function. For instance, maybe there is an early learning process that induces this economic mindset. Or perhaps there is social pressure to act in similar ways to coworkers.
In some sense, this is a bad proxy for making sense of this set of readings. These readings are focused on the political and ideological aspects of social movements with respect to the forces of the economic structure as Marx originally formulated. I am concerned with action at the individual level, action that is not necessarily political. But at the same time I can’t help but draw a connection between low-level individual action and social influence on the one hand, and large scale political movements on the other.  If we are to believe Althusser or Laclau and Mouffe, then the willingness to strike against an employer, to volunteer for a political party, or to argue with friends and family in favor of a movement, are important actions whose origins we have little idea about. In order to build a theory of how different determinants operate at the political level, perhaps it is necessary to do empirical analysis at the individual level. In my case, we can see the salience of some determinants over others, and it is my opinion that this is an important first step in understanding how larger social movements would function.


Bourdieu, Pierre. 1979. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 1 edition. London: Routledge
Sewell, William H. 1992. “A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and Transformation.” American Journal of Sociology 98 (1): 1–29.
Swidler, Ann. 2001. Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vaisey, Stephen. 2009. “Motivation and Justification: A Dual‐Process Model of Culture in Action.” American Journal of Sociology 114 (6): 1675–1715. https://doi.org/10.1086/597179.
