---
layout: post
title:  "Network Sampling"
date:   2018-5-15 17:50:00
categories: ['SNH']
published: true
Abstract:
defs_used:


---

# Network Sampling

How much of the network are we interested in capturing? Just a dyad?  
* Ego Network
  - Focal Node and All Directly Connected Alters
* Sub-Groups
  - Attribute Based Groups
* Ego _ N-Steps
  - Link Tracing
* Complete Network
  - The entire population of nodes we have within some boundary

  ## Ego Network Designs
  * Data - Ego and Alters
  * Usually start with a name generator - a means for identifying what you're looking for
  * The important matters question

  ## Complete Network Designs
  * Identify complete population boundary

  ## Partial Network Designs
  * Common for hard to identify populations
    - You start with a sample of seeds, and then turn their named partners to additional respondents.

# GSS PErsonal Networks Name Generator
People name close to 0, but it seems like people maybe have 290 or more.
* There are also anme interpreters where we follow up to make sense of the characteristic of the relationships
* We can think more about the attributes of the alters - if we want to know who they're connected to, we need to get as much info as possible from the respondents.
* What are the relationships among alters? And then we get deep into that
* There is something like "Network Canvas" where people can name their friends and how they fit together - but what really does one get out of this?

But how many name generators are we using? There are different types of relationships among students - so this is kind of relational stuff. But we often don't get the kind of stuff that we really want to be getting.

* You can also cap the number of alters? Should you? YOu can create a ceiling or floor effect

* The different size of the alter set that you use can lead to a different interpretation fo th enetwork data
* Maybe you should ask a lot because when you name you start with a small cluster, and then you get one but not the other

# Other Considerations?
* Specificity vs Generality Consideration - How specific do you want people to be about the time window? What is the denominator - how many people do you possibly talk with?

* Free Recall vs Roster Based - are you checking off? WHat's the tradeoff?
* If i'm doing a wave or panel based study, what do you do with previous nominations?

# Sampling Boundaries
<def>Boundary Specification Problem: In network sampling, which nodes do I want to collect, and which relationships do I want to collect. A realist strategy is to match perceptions of actors. Nominalist would be to define the population from the outside.</def>

This is an important problemf or all network sampling designs because we might only ahve certain relationships over others

# Non-Survey Methods
Take a table and observe kids through te day.

# Evaluating Social Network Data
* Claude Fisher looked at the important matters question, which moved from teh beginning to the end.
* How frequent is there agreement in what's going on? - Mos data collection has a window that they're relying on - and the window is open
 - If ties are discordant, it's unclear what to do. Do you add the tie or get rid of it? Can we estimate the credibility?
