---
layout: post
title:  "Theory Memo 1"
date:   2017-09-15 17:50:00
categories: ['Theory QE','Memos']
published: true
Abstract:
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{setspace}\doublespacing
defs_used:


---

# Systemic Theories of Social Systems

Merton (1949) argues that sociology must move away from all-encompassing theories of how society works, often from the perspective of only a single individual, and move towards theories of the middle range. Merton picks two particular trends to move away from: Marx’s Historical Materialism and Parson’s Structural Functionalism.  For all intents and purposes, Merton has won. Historical Materialism and Structural Functionalism are footnotes in sociological theory, if taught at all, and other classic theories are often viewed through the lens of the middle range.  Moreover, contemporary sociology is primarily a middle ranged project, with little thought directed to systematic integration of seemingly disparate subfields. Almost seventy years since Merton originally advanced this argument, perhaps the discipline is overdue for a critical look at middle range sociology. This memo takes a first step in this direction. First, I discuss middle range theory in more detail. Next, I describe a few problems that I see with a discipline devoted solely to middle range theory. Finally, I focus on the benefits that a general conceptual scheme can bring to sociology.

## The Importance of Middle Range Theory
Merton is worried that sociologists become too deeply tied to a particular total system of sociological theory. This is problematic for a number of reasons. First, these unified theories are in a sense, anti-scientific, in that they come out of the mind of a single individual whose genius is supposed to capture and systematize the entirety of social systems. Once the total system has been developed by an individual theorist, others rarely build on it in any concerted way. In addition, a total system often has blind spots built into it, and researchers neglect to develop, or even acknowledge, these blind spots.    Moreover, those subscribing to different total systems of sociology cannot truly communicate with each other, even if they are working on similar phenomena, because of different naming schemes in addition to the difference in loyalties.
These arguments are strong and upon an initial reading I was convinced of the importance of middle range theory. However, the ecology of the sociological field was quite different. From the way that Merton describes it, a significant amount of authors were already doing middle range theory in a Durkheimian tradition. However, a number of authors were continuing to work within the conception of a total social system, either in order to improve upon a theory or in the hopes of constructing their own.  At that point in the history of the field, the idea of a primarily middle range sociology was meant to unify a field that is disconnected by opposing total systems. The next section of this memo deals with some of the problems with middle range theory that have shown themselves to be of particular importance in a primarily middle range sociology.
Problems with Middle Range Theory
The operating contention in this memo is that sociology today focuses on middle range problems in different subfields, such as work, the economy, or stratification. The subfields themselves have become fairly siloed, with their own idiosyncratic formation of similar concepts in a quest for describing particular social problems. So, contemporary middle range sociology is problematic on two accounts. First, siloed sociology builds similar theories in different settings, and after some time those doing the same type of work in different subfields have spent time developing divergent languages and thus have difficulty communicating with one another. Second, a solely middle range sociology has no end. By orienting itself towards the explanation of different classes of phenomena in different subfields, reintegration in a meaningful way is not rewarded.
###Convergence
	Without an orienting total theory, or at least an outline of a total theory, for middle range theory to contribute to, social inquiries in different subfields of sociology develop along their own internal trajectories. These internal trajectories define social concepts in ways that Merton did not foresee. For one, without orienting concepts, when researchers  hope to explain disparate social phenomenon there is not a common set of concepts to draw upon. As a result, researchers are forced to repeat the work, rediscovering similar ideas, redefining similar sets of ideas into adjacent concepts.
In the sociology of culture, for instance, Bourdieu uses habitus to capture the ways in which individuals are taught to think and act. In organizational research, research use the term imprinting to talk about the ways in which organizations are effected by the context of their birth. The concepts of habitus and imprinting are both concerned with early stage learning that has lasting effects on some entity. However, without a common orienting theory to point researchers towards each other, organizational researchers begin talking about imprinting at the individual level, and rarely deign to talk or think about the concept of habitus. In this case, rather than a convergence of ideas, middle range theory must do the work of rediscovering concepts that have already been described in other fields. Moreover, the data on habitus is completely invisible to those who study imprinting and vice versa, even though the same principle is being utilized in both situations. Merton expects middle range theories to converge because some other class of researcher is consolidating special theories into a general conceptual scheme. But when there is no general conceptual scheme to speak of, and no researchers whose job it is to unify the field, theories in different fields are perpetually diverging from one another, rather than converging.
	Moreover, without a total conceptual scheme, there is no reason to privilege basic, fundamental claims that are transferrable between total theories. Merton is operating under the cloud of total conceptual schemes, but once the skies clear and the middle range prevails, research dealing with particular social problems  can theorize the specificity of particular events and phenomena without these theories being particularly basic. These theories can become just as problematic in their context specificity as total systems are in their total lack of theorems.
### No End in Sight
Another question one might pose to proponents of middle ranged theory is, when is there enough? Merton argues that there is simply not enough evidence to build an integrated scientific system of social action. But in the background of Merton’s own statement is the assumption that there continue to be individuals doing total systems theory. In his paper, he continues to import concepts from one subfield into another, in order to do the work to show how total systems theory will eventually be greatly aided by middle range theory. The problem is, if the discipline becomes totally engaged in middle range theory, then there is no one doing the job that Merton himself did. There is no urge to commonality, to drawing on examples from multiple subfields in order to perform a process of reintegration. So, not only is there no orienting theory to direct individual research to produce ideas in a way that can be understood by others in the discipline. There is also no plan for a reintegration.

## A Middle Without a Top
While Merton argues that  “Sociological theory, if it is to advance significantly, must proceed on these interconnected planes: (1) by developing special theories from which to derive hypotheses that can be empirically investigated and (2) by evolving, not suddenly revealing, a progressively more general conceptual scheme that is adequate to consolidate groups of special theories,” (p.51) the second of these two necessities, the total theory, falls by the wayside.  There is no one fulfilling the duty of total systemic thought that Merton sees as the immutable counterpart to middle range theory.
Partially, this seems to be due to the fact that total systems have been all but forgotten. Sociology rarely draws from Parsons or comments on theories of Structural Functionalism. Historical Materialism continues to play a role, but one can view it almost as a foil to the middle range theory that sociologists do instead. Historical materialism is an overly simplistic view of the progression of history which leaves out too many aspects of social life, and thus we should disregard social life and theorize instead the complexities of an ever expanding set of phenomena. When individuals can choose to do middle range research without an orientation to the general conceptual scheme, these researchers conceptual research altogether. By splitting up the duties, even if there were some group of researchers attempting to reconnect sociology in some general scheme, this attempt could be more or less ignored by individuals in their silo who have no connection to middle range theory.
But splitting the middle range and the integration of concepts into separate parts has an additional problem. That is, the integration of middle range theory into the development of general conceptual schemes creates the opportunity to ask new and interesting questions which move the discipline closer to a general scheme. However, these questions do not reveal themselves to others when one is not doing the act of integration.
	Even in the places where one might find more examples of something like the beginnings of a total system, we read instead middle range theory. For instance in section of Weber’s wide ranging Economy and Society there are the beginnings of a potential system. Weber defines a broad range of concepts in order to set out definitions, and then attempts to show how these concepts interrelate, for instance in describing how individuals are motivated by social status, economic rewards, or legal authority. In Simmel, we see abstract notions of how individuals fit together into different types of groups, and how these differences create dualities which differ in how individuals react to, and conceptualize, differences between themselves and others. A sociology concerned with a total system would work to integrate these concepts together in an attempt to make sense of all sorts of new ideas. Consider for example the changing role of social status in individual motivations when they change their reference group. For instance, what changes when an individual sees themselves as part of their family, or part of a religious community, instead of as part of a class. How do individuals deal with the different social pressures, and how can we extrapolate from this the primacy of some groups over others in driving individual action. Do these drives differ when considering economic power as opposed to social action? And what determines whether individuals will use economic or social motivations as the primary driver of their actions?
These sets of questions are derived from a push to integrate middle range theories into something more, and the act of integration raises more questions than it answers. The  act of integration raises more empirical questions that can be researched, but these questions are of a different class than the middle range theory that Merton provides. However, there is no place in middle range sociology for working on the integration of these complex ideas.
	Merton focuses heavily on the importance of doing middle range theory, and mentions in passing the importance of some other integrative sociology. In simply integrating middle range theories together, Merton sees an almost perfunctory role. In Merton’s view of middle range theory, once all of the middle range research has developed each important aspect of sociology empirically, some second stage of combination is mostly obvious, tedious work of putting together what everyone should already be able to see.  But this is a problematic way of viewing the development of sociology. I argue the construction of these integrative ideas is a powerful force that unites researchers and sets the stage for new research. A common reference point allows researchers to more easily see how their cases relate to other subfields, and dissuades the continual reconceptualization of the same phenomena under different names. A focus on particular social problems with respect to middle range theory leaves more blind spots than it clears up.


### Cihan Response
Adam,
Thanks for this memo. It is exactly the kind of thought & argumentation exercise I am looking for.
I understand your criticism of Merton very well. However I am not sure your characterization of contemporary sociology is valid for the entirety of the discipline. One could very well argue that institutionalism has become the common/hegemonic theory, even if many practitioners don’t think in terms of theorization (you can compare this to liberalism being the hegemonic ideology in late modernity, even if most people don’t know what liberalism is, or confuse it with American/Democratic Party liberalism in the sense of being favorable to government spending, etc.). Or, one could alternatively argue that there are competing theoretical projects (most notably, institutionalism vs. Bourdieu, whom you classify as a sociologist of culture, but has shaped many sub-disciplines). I do not mean you are “wrong” and one of these hypotheses are “right,” but the victory of middle range theory is not straightforward as it seems.
A strategy for the following memos could be formulating some arguments in a more tentative way. Think about these as programmatic questions rather than either just open-ended questions or finalized arguments. We can talk more about this.
I am not sure I understand what you are doing in the last few paragraphs (not including the last one). Perhaps you can explain p. 7 during our meeting.
Good job. And a good beginning!
