---
layout: post
title:  "Work - Memo 1"
date:   2017-11-3 17:50:00
categories: ['Memos','Work QE']
published: true
Abstract:
defs_used:


---

The task in the first week of many courses on work is to define the central concept in order to develop a common language with which students can communicate and future work can build upon. While I began my Qualifying Exam reading in the same way, I have become more skeptical of this approach. The first issue arises when the theoretical concept of work is defined only for the purpose of studying work, and is not considering the effects on other subfields.

The second type of problem is more crucial for the earlier study of sociology. The second problem arises when the concept of work comes from a broader theoretical focus which has at much at stake idealistically as it does theoretically. This is the problem that sometimes rears its head in a Marxist tradition of the sociology of work, and also likely would have been problematic if Arendt's redefinition of work had been integrated into sociology.

In the first reading we focus on Marx's definition of Estranged Labor in the Economic and Political Manuscripts of 1844. Here Marx is not focused on the definition of "Labor" and "Labor Power" as in Capital (which may have been a more appropriate introduction definitionally to work), but on the relationship people have to their work. Marx breaks down the act of labor into three things: the product one produces, the time one spends producing the project, and the social relations one has with others while in the process or producing and consuming. For each of these aspects of work, the individual worker can either be more or less invested in each of these, and the less invested in they are the more "alienated" they are. That is, if an individual is working on a product which they do not care about, they are alienated from the product of their labor. They are also alienated from themselves because in the act of laboring they are doing what others want them to do instead of what they want to do themselves, and therefore have a means-ends relationship with their own time. When workers are in such a situation, they are alienated from each other because they only see each other economically.

But Marx argues this is problematic because it separates individuals from the meaning of humanity, their "species-being," which is to do free, conscious activity. Through production one has the ability to work on the world in such a way to activate their species-being, but current processes of production stop them from doing so. The following quote from Marx summarizes the point:

"It is just in his work upon the objective world, therefore, that man really proves himself to be a species-being. This production is his active species-life. Through this production, nature appears as his work and his reality. The object of labor is, therefore, the objectification of man’s species-life: for he duplicates himself not only, as in consciousness, intellectually, but also actively, in reality, and therefore he sees himself in a world that he has created."

From this we can pull some conceptual definition of work. It is the individual's modification of the natural world. But along with this, definition is Marx's own theoretical baggage, which is concerned primarily with how invested in the world's modification they are. Moreover, a moral order is imposed on the definition since work either alienates or integrates the workers essence into it, and that essence is expressly defined in species-being. Again, the issue that a more scientific study of work runs into when using the concept of work as Marx defines it is that the concept is defined with relation to the essence of humanity, and a value judgement tied to it. This highlights some issues but also leaves others behind. Even the issues it does highlight do not necessarily lend themselves to further scientific study. In Capitalism, people are alienated from their labor by definition, and further study of the extent of alienation is almost irrelevant.

In The Human Condition (1958) Arendt distinguishes between Work and Labor, something that Marx does not do. The distinction is drawn based on the final product that one produces. This is separate from Marx because Marx is not particularly concerned with the use of the final product of work, but instead in the social relation. But, Arendt argues, there are really two kinds of things that one can produce. The first is the labor, the activities one must do to reproduce oneself, things like producing food or producing some bare necessity that one consumes. In work, on the other hand, the products are used to produce something greater. Labor is an endless and repetitive process by which one must reproduce their own existence, and hope for enough labor to be done that there is some  abundance. If we are a society of laborers, than we are a society of consumers, constantly producing and consuming what we produce. In this setting, Arendt argues, if we could automate production and simply sit back, we would just be endless consumers, eventually consuming the entire world.

But Arendt argues that there are also higher, more abstract activities which are not tied to consumption but are tied to production. For instance, the artist uses tools developed by people over time in order to produce something that endures. Work, for Arendt, is what an artist does when they use tools to produce something greater than their own material reproduction. Work has a clear end, where individuals conceive of something, produce it, and then are finished producing it. But also, there is a kind of state of mind surrounding work. The same thing can be conceived of as a thing to be consumed or a thing to be used for something greater, and when one produces things to be used, they are doing work. Work also produces things that are not ends in themselves, but things that are to be used for something greater. In later chapters Arendt also distinguishes political action and thought from work and labor, as the end of this kind of action is inherently different from the ends of work or labor.

Arendt's focus on the end products, rather than the social relations of production, provides a different meaning of work and different ideals that go along with it. A world of simple production for the sake of consumption has a negative connotation in The Human Condition. A sociology of work derived from Arendt would focus on what we produce and how we use these things, rather than whether an individual finds meaning in the act of production. Both Marx and Arendt define work within a greater system, but do so not only for the sake of categorizing the social world, but to make an ethical point about it. This means that further sociology based on these works, even while attempting to seem scientific, are drawn towards certain questions rather than others as a result of the ideals defined by the authors who introduced the concept.

While Arendt's definitions of work and labor did not end up influencing sociology, Marx's definitions of work and alienation played a large role in mid to late twentieth century sociology. During this time ethnographic studies of different workplaces and surveys sent out to different workers concerned themselves with how workers feel about their work. Blauner (1964) for instance breaks down alienation into four aspects: powerlessness, meaninglessness, isolation, and self-estrangement. Blauner considers different work places, from textiles to chemical workers, and essentially rates them along this scale. Ashforth (1989) digs deeper into attempting to understand the relationship between powerlessness in altering the way things are done at work and alienation from the labor process. Vallas (1989) brings up a point which we will see more in the next set of readings, by trying to understand whether automation makes workers more or less alienated, finding that work overall becomes more degrading, but it is also more desirable for others.   

As far as I see it, the problem with this line of research comes from an attempt to separate the concept of alienation from Marx's larger system and study it as a scientific phenomenon. But in the act of separation, some questions become highlighted while others become forgotten. For Marx alienation is a fact of capitalism, and it is unclear why from a Marxist perspective one would want to know whether certain industries are more or less alienated. In a sense, for Marx alienation can happen without the workers even realizing it. And yet in all of these studies workers subjectivities are the main outcome we are interested in. This is a line of argumentation that Braverman (1974) also develops. Moreover, as Marx becomes somewhat separated from the study of alienation, the reasoning behind privileging alienation over other relations at work becomes less clear. What about a worker's belief in the product that they are producing? What about the types of products that workers produce? What about the things workers take into account when choosing a job? These types of questions are left by the wayside by a sociology of work that focuses on Marx. But at the same time, the question of alienation ironically becomes divorced from Marx in order to be an objective of study, and the outcome of such study is more or less irrelevant to Marx's larger system.
