Bourdieu makes two central arguments which I believe are essential to understanding not only his own theory, but in reality represent grounded truths backed up by cognitive science and generally accepted by cultural sociologists. First, individuals become habituated to certain practices over time, such that they do them unthinkingly.  Second, people develop certain ways of making sense of the world (Bourdieu calls them dispositions, Sewell would call them schemas), and they transpose their thoughts developed in one area into another area.

Bourdieu's next argument is that these habituated practices are class based. They are class based partially because people are sharing the same experiences, going to the same schools, parties, etc., and these experiences provide the bases for our habituated practices and dispositions. Additionally, Bourdieu argues that dispositions are developed with the purpose of distinguishing the high class from the low class.

Bourdieu continues based off of these four propositions.

There are a few claims Bourdieu makes with respect to dispositions and transposability that Laclau and Mouffe (x) as well as Foucault (x) may have significant insight into. That is, to what extent are certain practices tied to dispositions?

Let us take an action in a specific field, say physicians choosing whether or not to accept medicaid, as an example to put them in conversation. Medicaid patients provide an ethical dilemma for physicians, since physicians are paid considerably less for seeing Medicaid patients, but these patients arguably present with a greater need for care, as stated in medical oaths and declarations to help the sick according to ability. For Bourdieu, the specific practice is related to a quest for dominance in the field, where both the quest for dominance and the relation to the specific practice are determined by early education and upbringing. Tastes for medicaid provision, then, may relate to what one learned about the importance of money, empathy, and the poor in early education. The decision a physician makes is, therefore, constituted by his class position in the final instance, and mediated by a search for recognition in the field.

The problem is, the content of this decision is up in the air. Does one distinguish oneself morally by accepting medicaid, or by not accepting medicaid? Does one look down on those who put profit first, or those who do not? By spending time interacting with high class patients or low class ones? As Foucault argues in "Two Lectures," the top down approach to making such arguments leaves any answer as possible. One can fit any data into Bourdieu's system and come up with the same answer. Perhaps it is an element of distinction to treat only high class patients, and separate oneself from the poor patients who may f
