---
layout: post
title:  "Work - Memo 3"
date:   2018-1-22 17:50:00
categories: ['Memos','Work QE']
published: true
Abstract:
defs_used:


---

The fifth, sixth, and seventh weeks of readings focus on Bureaucracy, Satisfaction, and Motivation. This section of the course, as well as the next one, are designed to focus on how the individual considers work, and how organizations and individuals deal with the connection between work and identity.  

While Edwards (1979) argues that bureaucratization creates an environment in which systemized objectives and rewards creates consent and reduces the possibility of worker solidarity, Merton (1940) argues that bureaucratization actually shifts how individuals think about themselves. Because of the inflexibility of bureaucratic work, in which there are strict rules regarding how individuals should approach each task, Merton argues that the individuals themselves become inflexible. Since they spend the majority of their waking hours within the workplace, these individuals actually come to take aspects of bureaucratic work (such as depersonalization and inflexibility) as values outside of the sphere of work. Much like in Hochschild (2012), the work itself alters the personality of the individual within and outside of work. Interestingly, in an attempt to study this phenomenon empirically, Kohn (1971) finds that the opposite seems to be true. By surveying over 3,000 individuals and asking questions about how they value self direction and non conformity, Kohn finds that those in more bureaucratic positions are more flexible and non-conformist. While this is an interesting finding, the research here is not fine grained enough in studying what is actually bureaucratic work, relying instead on the size of the organization and the number of different job titles to approach an understanding of how bureaucratized the work is. In depth interviews of individuals, say at the DMV, would provide a much more complete understanding of the effect of bureaucracy on the individual than empirical work, raw theorizing, or even historical research.

The next weeks readings focus on understanding how individuals derive satisfaction from their work. Kalleberg (1977) provides the most in-depth answer to this question, by conducting a factor analysis on a large survey which asked questions about 34 different aspects of work values. These resulted in six different types of satisfaction: intrinsic, convenience, financial, relations with co-workers, career opportunities, and resource adequacy. Each of these factors has independent effects on job satisfaction. In addition to work characteristics, Kirkman and Shapiro (2001) argue that satisfaction also relates to some deeper set of values that an individual holds. For instance, individuals who hold a value "power difference" a belief that some should have power while others should not, mediates whether people will like the job better if it allows for self-management. The notion here is that Kalleberg's relationship between work characteristics, or other aspects of how a job is organized, and job satisfaction is mediated by the abstract beliefs that people hold on to. That is to say, the same set of management practices imported into different settings will have different effects because the individuals in different settings may hold on to different cultural values. One interesting issue with this set of readings is that a contemporary sociology of culture has left the study of values behind, arguing that cognitive processes are more complex than a value system proposes. From this perspective, how would a contemporary view of culture explain the results that Kirkman and Shapiro find? Clark et. al (1996) take a different approach in the study of job satisfaction by considering how satisfied people are with their jobs through the life course. While previous studies founds that individuals became increasingly satisfied over time, Clark et. al argue that job satisfaction is U-shaped. Individuals early in their careers and later in their careers are happier, but for different reasons. The authors hypothesize that early on individuals are thought to enjoy the novelty of being at a job, and are happier compared to their peers. Later on, individuals have less aspirations and are not losing satisfaction by comparing themselves to others. These studies of satisfaction present a complex picture in which individuals derive satisfaction in their work from a combination of job characteristics, interpersonal comparisons, and individual beliefs. In addition, if Merton's hypothesis is correct, we must reckon with the fact that individual beliefs which effect job satisfaction can be altered simply by working at the job for long enough.

The next week of reading moves from questions about what determines job satisfaction to what keeps people working and motivated in a complex environment. Fine (1996) argues that individuals pull from different rhetorics in order to justify why they do different things at different times. In other words, depending on what is asked of them, people draw on different understandings of what it means to do their job, and this situated identity helps keep them motivated in their work. Menges et. al (2017) take an opposing standpoint, arguing that workers stay motivated by focusing on one aspect of their life - their family. Menges et. al find that workers work hard in jobs that they do not care about, substituting intrinsic motivation for what they call "family motivation." Carton (2017) shows that individuals who have no intrinsic motivation due to the task at hand can find success in reminding individuals about the overall goals of the organization. By transferring organizational objectives into long-term goals and finally short-term tasks, individuals can more easily make sense of how even boring work is meaningful within the context of the organization. Finally, Corwin (1961) shows that individuals sometimes develop their own beliefs and motivations for doing a job early on in the training phase that affect how they do their job and how they feel about it down the line.  

These readings demonstrate an interesting tension between the sociology literature and the management literature, which comes down to a history stemming from Marx and Taylor respectively. From a Marxist tradition, questions about work satisfaction and bureaucratization are concerned with how workers internal states are impacted by the organization, with a main focus on worker well-being. From a Taylorist tradition, there is also a focus on the internal states of the individuals, but with the overall goal to increase the productivity of the organization. An interesting question that comes up in all of the readings for this memo stems from the relationship between how individuals value work and how satisfied they are with their jobs. There are traces of both a Parsonian value-style conception of job values, as well as a more complex contemporary style. How would one use all of this information from this week to diagram how job satisfaction operates? 
